On Computers

Computers are pervasive in human society today. How and for what purposes do we humans utilize the power and nature of computer technology? How do we humans instruct computers--put another way, how do computers know what to do or how to behave? We humans create and infuse computers with the instructions that guide their behavior and operations.

Computers serve humans; computers solve problems; computers seek out answers to human questions. We humans write source code that computers read and interpret in order to understand their purpose and what they are build, constructed, to do; their reason for being. Computers without human intervention, without human instruction, are lifeless. Computers do and know nothing without a human creator. So, we've established that computers do precisely what their human creators instruct them to do. How do humans instruct, or write source code, to command their computer creations? This question is the focus of this essay.

Humans use what humans call programming languages to write the source code that commands, or instructs, their computer creations. All kinds and varieties of programming languages exist, and each programming language, of course, is created by humans. We not only create computers for specific purposes, but we also create the languages in which we instruct our computer creations to do their designed work. So one might ask why we humans create more than one programming language to be able to instruct our computer creations to do their intended job. What are the benefits of having multiple programming languages to instruct computers to their life's purpose?

I am not a computer scientist, so I cannot scientifically answer that question. However, I can certainly ponder this question and answer it in my own way.

One way to begin thinking about an answer to this questiion is to consider who or which humans are able to command computers to specific purposes. Computers do exist that are general purpose, meaning they do not exist for strictly one or more specific purposes, but exist as a general problem-solving machine or maybe a calculation engine is a better description. These general-purpose computers are really what I want to focus on in this article.